Title: Stop "class oriented programming"
Description: Stop using classes as containers, data belong to the instance.
Author: Cesar Saez
Tags: thoughts, code
Image: images/stop-cop.png

Hi folks,

It has been a long time without writing anything here, so I thought it was
about time say hi by sharing my view on something I've been "fighting with"
lately.

This article is about a common missunderstanding/pattern I've seen many many
times, especially when it comes to code written by self-taughts developers
(like myself), that's nothing but harmful for your future self and anyone using
your code.

I have found that, for some reason, people feel the need to write code
contained in some scope/namespace, and classes come naturally on a language
like python (why no functions? or even modules? I don't know, people love
classes). So instead of using classes to define types, people start to
implement the entire thing directly on an "unique" class, prefixing everything
with `self` as a way to store its state, and instancing the class once as a way
to call the code.

Let me share something with you: _the state (a.k.a. data) belongs to the
instance while the behaviour (a.k.a. methods) to the class_.

That's object oriented programming in a nutshell, you define a type
implementing certain behaviour and then create multiple instances storing
different states. You rarelly save the state at a class level unless you really
have a good reason to do it (yeah... there are plenty of valid reasons to do
it, but you know what I mean).


#### But Cesar... everybody knows that!

Are you sure?

Take an honest look at your GUI code (qt, anyone?)... if you are like the
average TD out there, I bet you are subclassing a mainWindow/dialog to add
widgets _AND set its state_ inside the class instead of creating "templates" to
be used outside your "container".

What about your rigging system? anim tools? (or whatever you develop in your
field).


#### Fair enough... but what's wrong about using classes as containers?

There's absolutely nothing wrong about it _as long as you know what you're
doing_.

If anything, I think it's not a good default as it leads to extremelly specific
classes and a lack of a proper interfaces to consume your code.

It also leads to tons of boiler plate, as the keyword `class` somehow loss its
value and people stop thinking about defining types and being generic, at the
end of the day you force everyone wanting to reuse your code to sublclass and
overload/extend most of the methods.

I'm not saying you shouldn't be using classes, classes are a powerful and
needed tool if you're doing OOP, but be aware that each time you type `class`
you're defining a new type, like `str` or `list` or any builtin, so use it
wisely.


#### So, what about you?

Have you seen this pattern before? (unittest!?) What do you think about it? Am
I the only one seeing it as a problem?

I would love to read your thoughts on the comments below... don't be shy! :)

Cesar
