Title: Ditching comments
Description: I'm ditching disqus and going tracker free.
Author: Cesar Saez
Tags: thoughts

Hi folks,

I just wanted to let you know that I'm ditching Disqus (the service powering comments) from this
website in an effort to eliminate trackers. I silently [removed google
analytics](https://twitter.com/csaezmargotta/status/678459610932502528) some time ago for the same
reason, but this time hurts a bit more because comments are the way we have to interact with each
other and I felt like it deserves an explanation.

First things first: I love receiving your feedback, everytime I get a message/email from someone
because of an article or some of my open source projects it totally makes my day, even "harsh"
comments push me to do better by correcting some missconception or learning something new. As a
sef-taught I owe a lot to the community and the whole purpose of having a website is to, in some
way, pay back by sharing/helping newcomers and pushing myself by learning from all of you. Big
thanks to all of you for your support through the years.

Said that, I also have strong concerns about online privacy and the status of the web, I surely
take measures to stay away from ads/trackers by using all sort of privacy oriented plugins,
extensions, VPN and whatnot; but I feel like it is totally unfair from my part to push trackers to
anyone in exchange for the ability to leave a comment on this website or to feed my ego by checking
stats.

There might be some of you thinking *what's wrong with ads/trackers? I have nothing to hide!*

Well, most cloud-based services like google analytics or social widgets (facebook likes and what
not) require the inclusion of a little script to provide the service, said script is also used to
track the visitor building an unique profile (which is a key piece to targeted ads... and who know
what else, you have no say on what that data is used for). This alone is horrifying, but you have
to consider that around 60% of the web uses google analytics and social widgets are rapidily
becoming omnipresent, alowing these companies to literally follow you from website to website
reconstructing your whole browser history without your knoledge/agreement.

This is wrong, we are not just talking about some script slowing down the website by adding some
extra network requests, it's about respecting your freedom! Websites are literally trading your
digital persona without your knowledge.

I know this website alone makes no difference to the googles and facebooks of the world, but it's
about integrity and acting according to my believes... even if it means giving up on some convenient
services along the way.

Cheers!
